Blog: Chicory 1.0.0-M1 Release Announcement (#653)
dylibso/chicory: docs/blog/2024-11-06-chicory-1.0.0-M1.md

  this translator is a drop-in replacement for the interpreter, and is 100% compatible 
  with the specs that we support in interpreter mode (`aot` is currently marked as experimental).
- we [improved our WASI implementation](#webassembly-system-interface-improvements)

Let's take a look in detail.

## Public API

In the name of simplicity and readability (but also encapsulation), we refactored a lot of code,
so our **public API** changed a little bit. You will find all the
[updated instructions on the docs][docs]. 

There is now a clearer boundary between `Parser`, `Module` and `Instance`:

```java
var module = Parser.parse("path/to/your.wasm");
var instance = Instance.builder(module).build();
```

We have also introduced a new unified mechanism to define host functions
and instantiate collections of related modules together, all at once.
We call this utility the [`Store`][store]:

```java
// instantiate the store
var store = new Store();
// registers a host function in the store
store.addFunction(myFunction);
// create a named `instance` with name `logger`
var module = Parser.parse(new File("logger.wasm"));
var instance = store.instantiate("logger", module);
```

> You can read more about the [`Store` in the docs][store].

Author: that's intended https://github.com/dylibso/chicory/pull/653/files#diff-d290ef84c56ecfede00d7933634feea8e296e763e88433ebc06551cd7a173edcR310

I think the unclosed block at the bottom messed up the rest of the formatting

and they are annotated. We support two annotations:

- `@Buffer`: the code generator translates the `String` value to a pair of integers:
  - the first being the index of (or pointer to) the beginning of the string UTF-8 bytes in the linear memory
  - the second being the length of the string in bytes
- `@CString`: the code generator translates the `String` into an index (pointer to) the beginning 
   of a null-terminated string of UTF-8 bytes

For instance:

```java
    @WasmExport
    public int pathFilestatSetTimes(
            int fd,
            int lookupFlags,
            @Buffer String rawPath,
            long accessTime,
            long modifiedTime,
            int fstFlags) {
        ...
    }
```

is effectively translated to the host function `wasi_snapshot_preview1.path_filestat_set_times` with signature:
- `long fd            // ValueType.I32`
- `long lookup_flags  // ValueType.I32`
- **`long raw_path_ptr  // ValueType.I32`**
- **`long raw_path_size // ValueType.I32`**
- `long access_time   // ValueType.I64`
- `long modified_time // ValueType.I64`
- `long fst_flags     // ValueType.I32`

> - returns `long[]`

Reviewer: Let's see if this is more readable:
```java
public long[] path_filestat_set_times(
  long fd            // ValueType.I32
  long lookup_flags  // ValueType.I32
  long raw_path_ptr  // ValueType.I32 => string pointer
  long raw_path_size // ValueType.I32 => string length
  long access_time   // ValueType.I64
  long modified_time // ValueType.I64
  long fst_flags     // ValueType.I32
)

Author: nice, but then I am rewording the sentence above:

> with a signature equivalent to

the reason it was not "code-structured" is that technically the signature would be still `(Interface, long...)` :^)

`````
is translated to the host function `wasi_snapshot_preview1.path_filestat_set_times` 
with a signature equivalent to:

```
public long[] path_filestat_set_times(
    long fd            // ValueType.I32
    long lookup_flags  // ValueType.I32
    long raw_path_ptr  // ValueType.I32 => string pointer
    long raw_path_size // ValueType.I32 => string length
    long access_time   // ValueType.I64
    long modified_time // ValueType.I64
    long fst_flags     // ValueType.I32
)
```

`````

This release is somewhat special:

- first of all, you will notice we have a **brand-new website**. We are continuously working
on improving the [documentation][docs] to make it a convenient and detailed resource to get started
- but also, this release marks the beginning of our path toward a final **1.0 version**.

The reason why this release took some time is we wanted to get as many thing right. In this release:
- we [updated the public API](#public-api), including [a new way to write host functions](#generated-host-modules)
- some modules are now [marked as experimental](#experimental-modules)
- we are now more confident in [the **Ahead-of-Time** translator](#ahead-of-time-translation):
  this translator is a drop-in replacement for the interpreter, and is 100% compatible 
  with the specs that we support in interpreter mode (`aot` is currently marked as experimental).
- we [improved our WASI implementation](#webassembly-system-interface-improvements)

Let's take a look in detail.

## Public API

In the name of simplicity and readability (but also encapsulation), we refactored a lot of code,

> so our **public API** changed a little bit. You will find all the

Author: yeah I was trying to downplay it not to scare people away, but fair. WDYT:

> ```suggestion
so we made some important changes to our **public API**. You will find all the
```

> so our **public API** changed a little bit. You will find all the

Reviewer: I like that

[updated instructions on the docs][docs]. 

> There is now a clearer boundary between `Parser`, `Module`s and `Instance`s:

Reviewer: Removing the plurals would make this more readable (and still correct grammar)
```suggestion
There is now a clearer boundary between `Parser`, `Module` and `Instance`:
```

            return new long[0];
        });
```

Specifically, you will notice that function arguments and return values are all now arrays of primitive `long`s.
This coincided with a huge refactoring/rewrite of the internals of our engine.

Such `long` values should be intended as raw bits, and should be usually converted back and forth 
to the appropriate types by downcasting or using the [public methods of the `Value` class][value-convert]

For instance, in the example above, we know it is safe to assume 
that those longs were originally widened integers.

We have however introduced a higher-level abstraction for convenience.

## Generated Host Modules

The new `HostFunction` API gives you raw access to the arguments of a function 
as they are represented in the Wasm runtime, but it can be inconvenient to use. 
Thus, we are now also providing an annotation processor to express `HostFunction`s 
in a more ergonomic way.

This feature requires you to depend on the experimental annotation processor:

```xml
    <dependency>
      <groupId>com.dylibso.chicory</groupId>
      <artifactId>host-module-annotations-experimental</artifactId>
      <scope>compile</scope>
    </dependency>

> ```

Author: aren't these compile-time only? 🤔  TBF I did not check though

You can now annotate a class as `@HostModule("your-wasm-module-name")` 
and export instance members of such a class by annotating them as `@WasmExport`s.

They will generate a `HostFunction` called `your-wasm-module-name.nameOfYourFunction`.

> For instance:

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, the following generates a HostFunction called wasi_snapshot_preview1.fd_close:
```

public final class WasiPreview1 {
    ...
    @WasmExport
    public int fdClose(int fd) {
        ...
    }
}
```

generates a `HostFunction` called `wasi_snapshot_preview1.fd_close`.

As you might have noticed from the example above, we are now using this feature ourselves, 
to implement the [WASI host functions][wasi].

The annotation processor generates a companion `<YourClassName>_ModuleFactory`, with a
static member `<YourClassName>_ModuleFactory#toHostFunctions(<YourClassName>)`.

This static member returns an array of `HostFunction`s that perform the
conversion between raw longs to the type signature you have declared.

You can expose this member in the most convenient way for your end users.

For instance in this case:

```java
@HostModule("wasi_snapshot_preview1")
public final class WasiPreview1 {
    ...

    public HostFunction[] toHostFunctions() {
        return WasiPreview1_ModuleFactory.toHostFunctions(this);
    }
    ...
}
```

### Supported Types

Supported input and output types for `@WasmExport` are primitives `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`.

We also support `String` arguments, provided that they are only passed as an input value,

> and they are annotated with `@Buffer`: this tells the code generator to translate

Author: oh right

> and they are annotated with `@Buffer`: this tells the code generator to translate

Author: > We also support `java.lang.String` arguments, provided that they are only passed as an input value,
and they are annotated. We support two annotations:
>
> - `@Buffer`: the code generator translates the `String` value to a pair of integers:
>  - the first being the index of (or pointer to) the beginning of the string UTF-8 bytes in the linear memory
>  - the second being the length of the string in bytes
> - `@CString`: the code generator translates the `String` into an index (pointer to) the beginning 
>   of a null-terminated string of UTF-8 bytes

from `com.dylibso.chicory.aot` to `com.dylibso.chicory.experimental.aot`

Nonetheless, we invite you to try them and welcome any feedback.

## Ahead of Time Translation

Chicory has been initially developed as a Java interpreter for WebAssembly; but it has soon acquired
a bytecode translator from Wasm bytecode to Java bytecode. This is what we call the **Ahead-of-Time** backend.
The Ahead-of-Time backend is a **drop-in replacement** for the interpreter, and it passes **100% of the same
spec tests** that the interpreter already supports.

You can instantiate a module by explicitly providing a `MachineFactory`. The default `Machine` implementation is the `InterpreterMachine`. You can opt in to the AoT mode by writing:

```java
var module = Parser.parse("path/to/your.wasm");
var instance = Instance.builder(m)
        .withMatchineFactory(AotMachine::new)
        .build();
```

Provide that you add the dependency:

```xml
      <dependency>
        <groupId>com.dylibso.chicory</groupId>
        <artifactId>aot-experimental</artifactId>
      </dependency>
```

This will translate every module you instantiate into Java bytecode on-the-fly and in-memory. 

> The resulting code is usually expected to evaluate faster and consuming less memory. This was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resulting code is usually expected to evaluate faster and consume less memory. This was
```

already present in our last release.

With 1.0.0-M1 we are also introducing a new mode of execution: build-time code generation.

> The idea is that this mode of execution will allow you to run Wasm binaries without depending

Author: right, I meant to say that _eventually_ that would be come true, but it's not necessarily true (nor is it a given that it will _actually_ become true. I will rephrase.

> The idea is that this mode of execution will allow you to run Wasm binaries without depending

Author: > With 1.0.0-M1 we are also introducing a new mode of execution: build-time code generation.
This mode of execution reduces startup time and will remove the need for distributing
the original Wasm binary.

on our Wasm runtime: 
- this improves startup time because the translation occurs only once,
when you are packaging your application
- it virtually allows you to distribute Wasm modules
as self-contained jars, making it a convenient way to distribute software that 
was not originally meant to run on the Java platform
- it still maintains the same performance properties as the in-memory compiler (in fact, 
the compilation backend is virtually the same)

The translation is performed during your build using a [Maven plug-in][aot-maven-plugin].

### Build-Time Ahead-of-Time Translation

> This mode of execution requires to configure a Maven plug-in. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: This mode of execution requires configuring a Maven plug-in. 
```
